# SNA2-final-group-project
## Introduction
The UK operates on a parliamentary system and is classified as a representative democracy, which means the public elect Members of the Parliament (MPs) to represent their interest in monitoring the work of the Government. The leader of the party that has the most MPs elected after a General Election becomes the Prime Minister (PM), or the Head of Government. The Parliament is made up of three parts: the House of Commons, the House of Lords, and the Monarch. The House of Commons is the elected chamber of Parliament, where laws are debated and amended. By contrast, the House of Lords is made up of Hereditary Peers (i.e. those who inherited their noble ranks), Life Peers (i.e. those who cannot pass their title on to their children) and Bishops. The Lords are nominated by the PM and appointed by the Crown, all of whom are selected for their knowledge and expertise in order to assist the work of the House of Commons. 

Perhaps with little surprise, the lack of representativeness of the House of Lords has been subject to critique (e.g. Dorey and Purvis, 2018), as it remains a large, unelected chamber of Parliament in a representative democracy. Taking into account of this, along with recent trends in convergence of party policies in Europe (e.g. Spoon and Klüver, 2019), this project is driven by a key question on representation: representation of whom? In light of this, our group decided to map the financial interests of members in the House of Lords by their political party, and investigate whether the homogenisation of the Labour / Conservative party policies is linked to the shared financial interest among the Lords. The result of this analysis will have implications in understanding the nature of representation of the House of Lords. 
## Theoretical Framework
Our project mainly drew on Borgatti and Halgin’s (2011) work on Affiliation Networks. In social network studies, _affiliation_ refers to group membership or participation in certain events. Affiliation data consists of binary relationships between 2 sets of items, producing bipartite networks, where ties are only established between sets of nodes but not within the set. In our case, the first set of nodes would be the members of the House of Lords, and the second set would be the Lords’ financial interests. The binary relationship would be whether the Lords have a financial interest with certain corporations or not. However, an adaptation to the Affiliation Network can be useful for discovering underlying social ties within the sets. Here, the authors introduced the notion of _co-affiliation_ as ties within a set of nodes, which can be used as a proxy for latent social relationships. This could be co-membership of a group or mutual attendance of an event; in our case, it would be two Lords sharing the same financial interest. The justification is that co-affiliation either increases the likelihood of two members developing a social relationship (e.g. by increasing the frequency of seeing each other at regular events), or is an indicator of an existing relationship (e.g. because the two people are already acquainted, they would be more likely to spend more time together by joining the same group). In other words, it’s an observable measure of an otherwise unobservable metric. It should be noted that the extent to which co-affiliation is able to suggest latent or existing social relationships depends on the size of the network, since in extremely large groups, co-membership does not necessarily lead to or imply acquaintance. 
## Methodology 
Our dataset was found on the UK Parliament website under “Register of Members’ Financial Interests,” the URL link of which is cited in our References. Our first challenge was that our original dataset was very large quantity-wise, and companies overlapped in the original mapping. For example, Microsoft showed up as multiple nodes and distinct companies due subsets of the brand. Our solution was to conduct “data cleaning,” which is the process of identifying and replacing incorrect information in the results of a data set (Data Cleaning, 2023). Data cleaning was important as it can greatly skew the results of our data analysis and lead to inaccurate interpretations of the current political landscape. 

In our dataset the Lords declared the companies with which they had financial interests, which made up the nodes in our network. Co-affiliation was found if there were ties within a set of nodes, which could mean two Lords sharing a said financial interest in the same company. The Lord with the highest degree centrality in our network is the Lord who has the most corporate shares in companies, and the corporation with highest centrality was composed of the most financial interests. The concept of betweenness centrality measures the extent to which a node lies on the shortest paths between other nodes in the network. Corporations with high betweenness centrality would be frequently invested in with other politicians that are not from the same party, for example Conservative and Labour parties. We ranked the Top 20 corporations with the highest betweenness centrality, and then with a histogram mapped how those corporations are divided between political parties. In our mapping of the dataset we paid attention to clusters, which symbolize communities of nodes that were more tightly connected to each other than to the rest of the network. Communities could represent clusters of corporations that are frequently invested in together, such as technology companies. We used the Girvan-Newman method, which is a community clustering technique which involves removing edges with the largest edge betweenness centrality (Chiang, 2021). “Edge betweenness” is the number of “shortest paths passing the edge” (Chiang, 2021), and in using this method we were able to simplify the dataset for more accurate analysis. 

## Google Colab Notebook
Here is the link to our group's Google Colab Notebook: https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1roEzQAWj2tK21sLJJ_6-5JMKx0ef5_eI?usp=sharing

## Results and Analysis 
In this section, we will show the results from our project that explore the financial networks and organizations associated with members of the House of Lords. As illustrated in the bipartite graph below, the graph is composed of numerous nodes and edges, highlighting that there is an extensive network of connections between the members of the House of Lord’s and the corporations that these members are financially interested in. The light green nodes on the graph represent the various corporations financially associated with the members of the House of Lords. while the different nodes in various colors represent the diverse political affiliations of House of Lord members. Degree centrality measures how many connections or links there are within one node in a network. In our analysis, we measured the degree centrality for both corporations and members within the House of Lords. As depicted in the graph below, the Big Issue corporation had the highest degree centrality among the corporations, while Lord Glendonbrook CBE had the highest degree centrality among the politicians. These results indicate the Big issue corporation had the highest number of connections for all of the corporations, and Lord Gendldonbrock had the most connections with different organizations for all of the politicians. In our project, the  Big Issue' corporation had the highest betweenness centrality. This indicates that the Big Issue corporation is the leading corporation that connects the different members of the House of Lords together within the network, meaning that the Big Issue is the biggest “bridge” within this network. The second histogram, presented below, shows how many of the top 20 corporations are linked to the political parties of the members of the House of Lords. For example as indicated on the histogram, the members of the political party, crossbench, have 19 connections with the top 20 corporations. However, the political party, Democratic Unionist Party, only has one connection. This means that the Democratic Unionist Party member’s only had one connection linking them to a top 20 corporation. To get our analysis we used the Girvan Newman Community Detection algorithm, which “relies on the iterative elimination of edges that have the highest number of shortest paths between nodes passing through them” (Girvan-Newman algorithm). In removing the edges at one at a time, we can break the social network down and see smaller communities within this network. In our project, these communities would be the clusters of corporations that overlap amongst the various politicians in our network. This strictly represents what corporations the House of Lord members are investing in and does not take into account the political affiliation of each politician. This enables us to strictly analyze the financial interests of members of the House of Lords and find groups formed within this network without the political party connecting these members. In our project this includes organization’s including, but not limited to, Chanel, Markham Services, and Magdalen College. 

## References
Borgatti, S. P. and Halgin, D. S. (2011). ‘Analyzing affiliation networks’, _The Sage handbook of social network analysis_, 1, pp.417-433.

Dorey, P. and Purvis, M. (2018). ‘Representation in the Lords’, in _Exploring Parliament_, pp.244-254.

Spoon, J. J. and Klüver, H. (2019). ‘Party convergence and vote switching: Explaining mainstream party decline across Europe’, _European Journal of Political Research_, 58(4), pp.1021-1042.

Chiang, Jeffery. “Girvan–Newman - the Clustering Technique in Network Analysis.” Medium, Analytics Vidhya, 11 Oct. 2021, medium.com/analytics-vidhya/girvan-newman-the-clustering-technique-in-network-analysis-27fe6d665c92. 

“Data Cleaning: Definition, Methods and Relevance in Data Science.” DataScientest, 20 Apr. 2023, datascientest.com/en/data-cleaning-definition-methods-and-relevance-in-data-science. 

“Financial Interests.” Conflict of Interest: Division of Finance and Administration, 25 May 2022, coi.utk.edu/financial-interests/. 

“Register of Members’ Financial Interests.” UK Parliament,www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/standards-and-financial-interests/parliamentary-commissioner-for-standards/registers-of-interests/register-of-members-financial-interests/
